until today announced its 10 series of
desktop CPUs which it's calling the 10th
generation of CPUs and that's a bit
questionable if it really is a 10th
generation but that's what they're
calling it and the 10 core 20 thread
core I 9/10 900k not to be confused with
the 10 900 X is the chart-topping part
in terms of the desktop platform which
is going to be Z 494 this one so we have
a lot of specs to go through Intel has
at this point confirmed several of the
exclusives that we've leaked over the
past couple of weeks that we received
from system integrators and other
sources in the industry including a
heavier focus on thermal control and
improvements to the well the packaging
of the CPU the dye height are standing
on the die to control the thermals a bit
better because they've added two more
cores to the top end of things also
hyper threading comes back which is
something that the 9700 K drops so
that's going to become a really
interesting battleground for Intel where
they previously sort of forfeited it the
press release also goes through typical
marketing slides and claims but we'll go
through those one by one before that
this video is brought to you by the be
quiet pure base 500 DX the pure base 500
DX is a new push from be quiet and to
mesh fronted cases that are more
thermally focused the 500 DX maintains
high build quality and attention to
detail for its dust filters front panel
installation and fan placement and still
has additional focus on noise control
the case comes with three 140 ml /
wayne's to fans stock and has RGB LEDs
but with a physical Hardware switch for
easy control learn more about the be
quiet pure bass 500 DX at the link in
the description below first question to
go over is why is it a new socket and
this is where Intel is moving to an LGA
1200 socket from 1151 so there's 49
extra pins on the 10 series of CPUs for
desktop platforms that means obviously
you can't roll forward the z3 90 boards
you have to get a new motherboard with
it is this so evil even though the
architecture is more or less the same
the chipset is identical other than the
addition of some new Wi-Fi capabilities
well the answer is probably not and we
think we know why when we asked until
why the LGA 1200 socket has to exist
when
Kanellis appears to be at least as of
now compatible aside from the socket the
answer was the extra 49 pins are for
quote improved power delivery and
support for future incremental io
features there are not really any other
io features that Intel could increment
other than the PCIe generation so we
spoke with a couple of motherboard
manufacturers obviously off record and
confirmed these suspicions that this is
probably to support the next CPU in the
same socket so not 100% sure on this but
gonna call it now pretty sure the next
CPU that comes out from Intel will be a
z4 90 compatible CPU even if there's a
590 we don't know yet and we'll have
PCIe gen 4 on the cpu that means it
wouldn't be on the chipset but you'd at
least get Gen 4 from the CPU to probably
PCIe one and maybe one I'm about to
device but we'll see that looks like is
why the LGA 1200 talked it exists we're
fairly certain of it certain of it but
obviously it's not honored and confirmed
from in televisual e other information
that's useful to know so the 10 700 K it
looks the most interesting because it's
basically 9900 K for probably about $400
we have some shots of the new CPU the
lidded to go through as well but let's
start with the most important
information first from there spec sheet
and then we'll talk about the deeper
down thermal changes and some
information that we've confirmed
directly with sources so we have some
new value to provide you here if you've
already seen a couple of other pieces on
this here's intel's official slide for
the main desktop specs the Intel Core I
910 900k tragically named as it is
should not be confused with the existing
10 900 X h EDT part that's also got 10
cores the 10 900 X runs on X 299 and has
more PCIe lanes and also was dead on
arrival so best not to confuse them
the 10900 K is advertised at 3.7
gigahertz base single core turbo at 5.10
turbo boost 3.0 to 5.2 gigahertz at
least on Windows if not others and Intel
TBB or a thermal velocity boost up to 5
point 3 gigahertz and 4.9 gigahertz all
core
Intel's defined TDP often runs close to
the turbo duration expired power
so 125 watts looks like about our
baseline after turbo duration expiry the
pricing is the same as the nine 900k so
that's an improvement of two cores at
the same price and might buy intel
sometime before its next to note a
thermal velocity boost you may have
heard of on laptops this implementations
slightly different but not too much and
if you haven't heard of it
the basics of it is it's kind of like
the boosting functionality you'll find
on a GPU these days and similar to AMD
with precision boost to not to be
confused with precision boost to
overdrive by the way in that thermal
velocity boost or TVB will follow the
temperature of the CPU to an extent
you're not going to get a sliding scale
or a gradient like you get with an D
precision boost - and it's processors
we're with AMD we can take a CPU run it
at 80 degrees and run it down to minus
80 degrees with liquid nitrogen and
roughly every 5 degrees Celsius or so
all the way down from plus 80 to -
whatever you want to run it at you're
going to end up with some form of
frequency increases this doesn't work
that way so instead intel's is more of a
binary yes or no and the yes or no is is
it over 70 degrees Celsius yes or no if
yes then there's no TVB and is it under
the boost power limits and under the
thermal threshold of 70 degrees Celsius
if both of those permit you'll end up
with the frequency boost that's listed
on that table of 5.3 gigahertz for TVB
or 4.9 now all core on the 10900 K you
could also turn off the power limits and
it would as long as it's under 70 C it
would boost presumably it's a 5.3 or 4.9
all the time without the power limits
but at that point you're basically
overclocking that's not stock anymore
so TVB works by establishing that
threshold of 70 degrees Celsius the
power limits are also important to go
over and what they are we did get those
from Intel officially so Intel 10 900k
unlocked CPUs those power limits are
recommended as PL 1 at 1:25 PL 2 at 250
and then at AO at 56 seconds so this is
the official guidance from Intel which
is
careful phrasing because insult can't
explicitly control what the motherboard
makers do and a lot of them as you've
seen will do things like multi-core
enhanced multi-core performance where
they blast the power limits or the turbo
duration limit to something that's not
technically in guidance by Intel so now
it's not technically running within the
spec and the TDP no longer means
anything so that's the official numbers
anyway most the board should follow it
these days but not all of them will the
ten 700k cpu which is actually is a nine
nine nine seven the ten 700k is going to
be running a PL one of 125 a PL two of
229 and tau a 56 seconds as well and
then the i5 10 600 k is going to be
running at 125 180 to 4 PL 2 and 46
seconds for the turbo boost limits so
that's that's the official guidance
that's what we're going to be testing at
when we get to testing if you're curious
about the chipsets will pop up a diagram
it was e 490 on the screen maybe we can
put Z 390 next to it or something like
that they are basically identical so you
won't have to learn anything new with
the chipset so it all pretty much
applies between 390 and 490 nothing new
to learn here other than the change in
the Wi-Fi support in the bottom right of
the diagram in terms of controlling the
thermals one of the things that we had
an exclusive on a couple of weeks ago
was talked about how the die height is
being brought down closer to the
substrate so the actual height of the
die is effectively being sanded down and
the goal of that is to try and tighten
up the therole performance so the IHS is
now going to have to be thicker in order
to make up for the loss of height in the
silicon itself we didn't get this
explicit question answered but we did
ask in the chat at the time of the press
event if the silicon adhesive that black
glue around the outside would change at
all with just this generation because
the silicon adhesive is a large part of
the higher thermals you see before addy
lid when you deal it something
decreasing that basically air gap
between the IHS and the substrate and
bringing everything closer together
that's a significant part of
improvement outside of changing the
interface the interface by the way is
still soldered Tim we'll talk about that
more in a second but the silicon will be
300 microns shorter than previously this
is on K skews only so this die sanding
is not going to be present on non case
key parts presumably the KF would also
have this but 300 microns shorter than
previously that jobs from 800 microns to
500 microns according to Intel and the
goal is to get the heat out of the
silicon and into the IHS faster the IHS
will have to be thicker than previously
because Intel wants to retain cooler
compatibility and support for the socket
and that also means maintaining a torque
and a force pack that the CPU can
withstand without bending decreasing the
IHS thickness while also decreasing the
silicon thickness is a recipe for
bending a CPU under the existing 50
pounds of force recommendation that the
official LGA 1150 xpect calls for so
Intel is deploying a thicker IHS than
before for this mechanical guidance and
it's all copper just nickel-plated like
always what Intel calls stim is also
still in use so soldered thermal
interface material rather than thermal
paste used previously it was also in the
9900 K which we deal with it if you
wanted to see what that looks like we
are uncertain if this applies to all the
new skews or just desktop for the stem
versus thermal paste use but we'll have
to look into it as the chips roll out
the die finding approach to silicon is
interesting and a fact that we presented
again a couple of weeks ago we've also
seen it in person it's definitely a
thinner dye and I adjust for sure is
different than the 9900 ki HS one quick
point of clarity here as well we're at
this point 100% certain although right
before filming word but a hundred
percent certain now Intel did mean three
hundred microns shorter if you see it
reported anywhere else as a different
number there's a reason for that
basically it's supposed to point three
millimeter difference three hundred
microns or micrometers if you prefer and
what Intel actually said on the call was
micro millimeters which we spent a lot
of time on Google but to the best of our
abilities it looks like a micro
millimeter isn't really a thin or if it
is it would be one millionth of a
millimeter
or about 0.000001
millimeters so we're pretty sure that's
not three of those that Intel is talking
about they're talking about definitely
microns dear Bauer is a materials
engineer though and also a German who
builds his products with precision
German engineering quoted on the product
boxes so he figured he'd be best
qualified to answer what a micro
millimeter is and he sent us this in
response to the question so it's three
hundred microns shorter is what we're
both saying for overclocked and we
already went over the power limits for
stock usage but if you wanted to ignore
all this and go for an OC intel has made
some potentially critical updates to us
OC support on this platform this is a
community that's often neglected so it's
an important play for a company which
has found itself in an enthusiast
underdog position for the first time in
over a decade at this point the Intel 10
series will introduce a volt frequency
curve to XTU
Intel's perpetually broken overclocking
software but ACS already has this
adapted into its own OC utilities now
XTU
at times has worked really well for us
but typically around launch of a new
product it's really buggy and we've had
a hell of a time trying to get it to
really work properly so it's hit and
miss but the fact that Intel is
expanding its vote frequency curve to
software vendors is great because
hopefully some of the companies the
motherboard makers who really have a lot
of experience making ancillary OC
software can get in there and add this
feature to it we did confirm that the VF
curve will not be available in BIOS
there's no pre-made BIOS package for
motherboard makers that will have that
functionality baked into it this is
something where just for point of
reference for you Andy and Intel both
provide some reference data or samples
to motherboard and BIOS makers to build
their devices off of Andy for example
provides the entire aim the overclocking
subsection of BIOS that gets shoved into
every BIOS that you see for rise in CPUs
so we thought Intel might be doing that
here but it doesn't look like that's how
it works the idea is that a given
frequency can run out a given voltage
rather than just a fixed voltage across
all cords or an adaptive voltage over
which the
has limited control and which sometimes
it doesn't work thanks to motherboard
manufacturers the volt frequency curve
could presumably be tuned for the CPU to
run at a lower voltage while at a lower
frequency having implications for a
better perch if power profile at the
lower end of performance and potentially
a more aggressive tune at the higher end
this is mostly useful since all CPUs and
the or Intel are going to be set to
accommodate the worst bin or the lowest
common sellable denominator if you end
up with a better chip which is often
likely than baseline you could at least
tune the power profile to improve the
power consumption or reduce the amount
of heat you're dealing with we're not
sure if this will be worth using yet
since its kind of hit and miss with GPUs
but we'll give it a shot since it's the
first time we've had an option for CPUs
the biggest upside we took away from
this part of the presentation was the
explicit acknowledgment of overclocking
and that intel is trying to do stuff for
the OSI community and on that note -
another interesting promise for
overclocking was DMI and PCIe graphics
overclocking so this is maybe a way for
Intel to somewhat mitigate the current
PCIe gen 4 advantage that AMD has over
it PCIe gen 4 for graphics doesn't
particularly matter yet you can make it
look like it does but in almost any real
scenario it just doesn't but it does
start to matter for i/o so we'll be
curious to see if you're effectively
overclocking the PCIe bus we need to
test it out obviously and see if there's
any impact on storage speed or any
impact on the scoring for a PCIe bus
constrained test like the PCIe bandwidth
test in 3d mark which not a realistic
use it's not what games look like at
least but definitely a good use to try
and see if the PCIe bus speed has
changed at all or if TMI changes impacts
the speed of devices that are connected
lower down in the chain intel is also
adding per core hyper threading targets
to its controls
so toggles rather so these will be fun
to work with for a competitive or
extreme overclocking we don't foresee a
whole lot of use in normal like
lighter-weight overclocks
you might as well just do an all core
with a voltage and multiply and that's
it but we'll try it out to
Pro OC contacts for what it's worth have
told us that Z 490 is one of the easiest
platforms they've worked on for
overclocking in a long time so that's an
upside to all this and I also made a
number of claims and it's marketing
slide slides to the press that we need
to verify as well first Intel claims
that quote around 60% of games are
optimized for single core
we asked Intel and the press call to
clarify this phrasing namely we wanted
to know from what year this
approximation was calculated and tell
answered this by suggesting that we take
the question offline and follow up at
the time of filming there was no
follow-up if Intel is referring to all
games made ever in all time including
space war which was made for the PDP one
in 1962 then 60% is probably accurate or
even under shooting it a little bit
speaking to today though this is mostly
marketing BS because we can tell you
from firsthand testing experience that
we've seen more frame time consistency
issues than ever before on even a fork
or six course sometimes and eight chords
without hyper-threading we've seen
issues too so we're starting to see
clear benefit from six or eight real
cores on a cpu and this 60% optimized
for a single core number has been in the
very least massaged to data to look like
something that obviously Intel wants it
to look like but at the time of speaking
with Intel and before filming they had
about a nine-hour gap to answer the
question here and we have still not
gotten an answer of where does that
number come from because this is
something need flag on Wikipedia as
citation needed quick hard update we're
dropping in one day later here we got
this just in time to finish the video
for publication Intel sent us an email
saying slide three in the file shared
yesterday it had a version error the
correct information is reflected in
slide three of the new PDF and it says
the bullet that was removed pertaining
to the 60% of games are optimized for
single core was it meant to be an
internal guide only we regret the error
and appreciate your understanding so
that was Intel's a final response to our
question of citation needed where did
you get this information
in other words it's gone from marketing
BS to ax
just literally lying and hoping that no
one would ever ask about it so a good
job Intel you've managed to damage your
reputation in an otherwise neutral
presentation about product
specifications this was completely
avoidable someone internally should have
pushed back and asked the questions that
they knew we would ask when given the
presentation and now rather than just
being a simple here's the new specs and
prices it's actually here's the new
specs and prices also you can't trust
anything in this presentation because no
one is going to believe that that number
was for internal guidance nobody at
Intel needs that guidance and if they do
they're doomed so a good job but anyway
let's let's get back to the main video
even if those games the ones that well
even if today's games load one core
heavily which is still off in the case
you typically get a lot of renders
thrown rendered tasks thrown at one core
it can still be misleading to suggest
that these games would somehow run
better on a CPU of an uncertain core
count so long as the primary cores
frequency is sufficiently high because
that's just not true
the primary course frequency could be
seven gigahertz but if you don't have
enough other cores to back it up and
enough other threads to back it up then
you are going to have frame time issues
in a lot of modern games so that
statistic is BS and you should just
ignore it
especially because installed couldn't
back it up in a tie and nine hours since
asking so in this regard it's odd that
Intel would also push this number at all
because it's top of the stack CPU he
said ten core part it's not like its
deficient or malnourished in poor count
so install still got a lot of multi-core
parts coming out what we understand they
probably mean is that it's games are
optimized for heavier load on one core
but again see previous example of why
that's not really a meaningful
explanation so to be fair to Intel of
course and he also fills its marketing
presentations with BS this is something
we've talked about before with their
announcements as well like when they
pointed a thermal camera at a heatsink
which by the way should be hot because
it's a heatsink and that's what it does
and also it's a shiny reflective
object so now you're dealing with
thermography on something for which you
have no controls over reflectivity or
emissivity and the data is therefore
invalid but that was AMD about eight
about a year ago now so they they take
turns doing it is what we're saying
Intel also had a slide where they made
claims regarding relative performance
between its new CPUs and older hardware
but at the time of the presentation it
wasn't clear what the older hardware was
it was very deeper down in an appendix
in the documentation so we pulled that
up and it looks like Intel is comparing
it to a quote three-year-old PC and if
you look deeper it says that that
three-year-old PC is a 7700 K which also
happens to be what AMD is comparing
against for its rise in three thirty one
hundred and it's our three thirty three
hundred X CPUs that are coming up so
that looks to be the posturing point
going forward for both companies back to
the spec sheet briefly it looks like
this Intel's keep units 500 ish dollar
price point for the ninety nine hundred
K but with a CPU that should be
objectively better that's a good move
and will likely keep in tot the top and
gaming and may help it against the 3900
acts and some all core workloads but
we'll need to test that the extra
threads on the 3900 X might be enough to
keep it in the lead in blender although
we suspect it may be close between the
two the 10900 KF kills the integrated
graphics in exchange for a sixteen
dollar reduction in base 1k unit pricing
so that tells you what Intel values it's
IGP at for retail the specs are the same
other than this so might be a good
alternative the 10 909 K and f9 k these
names are terrible are locked and
reduced to 65 watt TDP which we should
note is likely one for one ish when
boost limits expire and a10 700 K is the
9700 k replacement but it now has
hyper-threading again and is called an
i-9 at least sometimes that's probably
the most significant move in this entire
product stack and is also the most
promising but it's effectively a 9900 K
at $350 1k you pricing so that should
put it probably around 400 retail this
is the one that we think will be the
most promising from Intel the i-5 series
runs the 10 600 K at 4.5 gigahertz all
core and a 6 core 12 thread also
unlocked and in the range of 237
262 1k unit pricing so 250 to 280 retail
most likely as for the i3 line the
rumors came true and that is in fact an
old i7 replacement these are for core 8
thread parts which is actually pretty
crazy when considering how utterly
pointless the i3 line became in the last
three years and they now show promise
for testing there's also a set of
Pentium Gold CPUs and seller ons
these will likely cover in the 75 to $90
segment the G 6500 will likely be around
$90 MSRP and as a2 core for thread part
at 4.1 gigahertz and more discussion on
those as they come out just to really
clarify here if you're not aware Intel
lists its pricing as 1k unit pricing
there's nothing really wrong about this
because that's the pricing that they're
showing the world which includes
distributors so when you see the 1k unit
pricing it's literally for 1,000 units
of that part it's more or less a
wholesale or a bulk buy price so nothing
wrong with that as long as you know
that's what it is and the end price is
typically if you see something that lets
say 360 $370 1k and a pricing you'll see
it close to 400 for single unit retail
for people doing DIY and remember that
DIY is not Intel's biggest market even
though that's one that they need to claw
back at this point
so overall Intel has made some moves
that are actually very interesting and
maybe promising certainly the thermal
moves are things we look forward to
testing the die size is increased as
well we measured this in person and it
looks like the die size is roughly 22 by
9 for new and it was roughly 19 by 9 for
old or 22 by 14 for the previous 10 core
part so that's just with a ruler on top
of the die but it's a pretty close
number it gives you an idea for the
difference about 100 millimeters squared
difference in the die size which will
also spread the heat load out a bit
parts are promising then the marketing
is really bad and still somewhat
tone-deaf at least for the technical
press and these marketing is also filled
with very mature and adult like things
to say like jebaited and pointing
thermal cameras that heat sinks and
using ashes of the singularity CPU test
for a GPU benchmark on the Radeon are X
480 but then using the
you test on the competing 10 series card
yes and we didn't catch that when he did
it in Macau with the 480 release so at
this point we criticize a marketing in
the hopes of one day maybe the people
doing the marketing will realize that
the audience is smarter than the average
caterpillar that could look at a slide
and realize what it's looking at but
we'll see
until needs to compete to its credit it
looks like they're really trying by
putting a hyper thudding back on what is
effectively an i7 part and the 10-9 hard
KF will likely be a new leader in gaming
tasks you start getting into territory
of it's difficult to show those
differences you'll see why in an
upcoming video from US where until new
GPUs come out the bottlenecking happens
sooner but they'll come out eventually
and Intel will be ready for that so the
i3 parts look like interesting
competition for Rising 3 as well we're
skeptical of those given Intel's recent
history that any of these parts will be
available in reasonable purchasable
quantities at launch so Intel has lately
been prioritizing sales to its OMS and s
is they've publicly stated this and
earnings calls and forecasts and
typically it's the lower end parts that
start to get sort of cannibalized to
favor the silicon use for the higher-end
parts or to sell to the OEMs and si so
the DRI market ends up kind of dry but
we'll see what happens there
it's something obviously to report back
on at launch and that will cover us for
Intel's
upcoming 10 series of products certainly
it'll be interesting to get a refresh in
the space and we're excited to do the
testing on all these parts not really
sure where the performance will fall we
have some expectations again
10900 KF as it should probably be at the
top of the gaming charts but we really
need to see what happens in the
production and workstation charts which
we've really bulked up on for this round
of testing we have all new testing
methodology that we've already filmed
the video for and we'll be unveiling
shortly so check back for that subscribe
for more as always go to store documents
access not met or patreon.com slash
gamers Nexus type it out directly and
we'll see you all next time
[Music]